# README - Shiny App - Genomic Disorders Exploration (GDE)

## Note. Tutorial at the end of the README file and in the Shiny App itself

## SOURCES/REFERENCES of genomic data

This application was created for learning purposes only. The references used for obtaining the data are:

* DECIPHER: Database of Chromosomal Imbalance and Phenotype in Humans using Ensembl Resources. Firth, H.V. et al (2009). Am.J.Hum.Genet 84, 524-533 (DOI: dx.doi.org/10/1016/j.ajhg.2009.03.010). 
* This homework makes use of genomic data generated by the DECIPHER community. A full list of centres who contributed to the generation of the data is available from http://decipher.sanger.ac.uk and via email from decipher@sanger.ac.uk. Funding for the project was provided by the Wellcome Trust.
* Gray KA, Yates B, Seal RL, Wright MW, Bruford EA. genenames.org: the HGNC resources in 2015. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Jan;43(Database issue):D1079-85. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku1071. PMID:25361968. 
* HGNC Database, HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee (HGNC), EMBL Outstation - Hinxton, European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridgeshire, CB10 1SD, UK www.genenames.org (complete HGNC dataset downloaded [here](https://www.genenames.org/cgi-bin/statistics) on November 17/2017).
* Orphanet: an online database of rare diseases and orphan drugs. Copyright, INSERM 1997. Available at http://www.orpha.net Accessed (accessed November 17, 2017).
* Orphadata: Free access data from Orphanet. © INSERM 1997. Available on http://www.orphadata.org. Data version (XML data version en_product4_HPO.xml).

# FILES TO REVIEW FOR STAT547

* My online Shiny App [Genomics Disorders Exploration](https://mylinhthibodeau.shinyapps.io/GenomicDisordersExploration_v2/)
* My Shiny App files
	- File [User Interface (UI)](ui.R)
	- File [Server](server.R)
	- Folder [data](data/)
	- Folder [www](www/)
* Since medical genetics/genomics is specialized topic, I made a tutorial for you to test my app and it can be found both in the Genomic Disorders Exploration App and at the end of the README file.
* Extensive data manipulation/transformation was required to obtain correctly formatted datasets for the app, so I have a dedicated Rmd/Md file for data manipulation [here](genomic-disorders-exploration-data-manipulation.Rmd).

## Some issues encoutered during this homework

#### (1) Data manipulation with csv or tab separated files and `read.table()` function

I discovered that `read.table()` does NOT like the presence of apostrophes (') in the data at all. It didn't parse the columns appropriately. The `read.csv()` and `read_csv()` did not work out on the messy datasets eitehr. 

I have to remove the apostrophes in a non kosher (non programming) way (basically in TextWrangler) in order to be able to get going. It took me a lot of time before being able to figure out the source of the problem, but now I will watch out for apostrophes. 

#### (2) XML file format - Too tricky for me

I tried to manipulate the files myself with the XML and xml2 packages, but was unable to reach completion. Luckily, a friend of mine helped me to get the data from orphanet/orphadata xml files into a useable format ! 

#### (3) Ways to make messy data even messier

Yes, it definitely possible to make an even bigger mess with the data, I experienced this phenomenon in this homework. Here are some "simple" ways to mess your data (so basically things you should pay attention to):

1. Matrix vs dataframe: In data table manipulation, I occasionally found myself handling matrices rather than dataframes and I didn't even know it happened. So you can imagine that functions for dataframes specifically did not work out well!
2. Blank vs NA: I used different file formats (csv and tsv) and different reading/writing functions, and I realized that some "empty cells" of my dataframes were being populated by "NA" and some others remained blanks. I will let you imagine the numerous problems that can arise with trying to filter that kind of datasets based on a feature being present or not.
3. Small glitches made big: If there is a small glitch in one dataset, and you join it to other datasets and/or perform some data manipulation steps to obtain a single final dataframe, the glitches become magnified by the effect of manipulating the data. For example, if a dataframe contains some lines with "shifted data". If you join "by" a column (e.g. `left_join(dt1, dt2, by = ("column"="column"))`) with another dataframe, you end up expanding your dataset size instead of reducing it. 

***
## Newly acquired skills or knowledge

Well, basically everything I have done for this Shiny App homework was new, but I will still list a few things.

1. Always verify the class of your data (e.g. list, dataframe, matrix).
2. The Shiny app tutorial [here](https://shiny.rstudio.com/tutorial/) is really good, I highly recommend it !
3. I learned how to make a Shiny App ! You can see my Genomic Disorders Exploration App directly to know the technical aspects, but here are some examples of what I learned.
**UI (User Interface) - Specific ** 
	- tags$ are a family of functions (e.g. `tags$h1()` for header 1, `tags$em()` for italic writing, etc.) that allows to modify text output. The most frequently used have been made into functions (e.g. `tags$h1()` is the same thant `h1()`). These are really useful to put up organized text/paragraphs and insert hyperlink. 
	- `theme = "bootstrap.min.css"` to use a CSS file to make the App appearance much more pleasant.
	- `tabsetPanel()` with `tabPanel()` subdivisions allows to create multiple tabs for the user to navigate.
	- `sidebarLayout()`, `wellPanel()` and `fluidRow()` to organize different sections of the page.
	- `actionButton()` to make a clickable button, and also how to use eventReactive() so that the table output will not be displayed until the use clicks on the button.
	- I have learned how to use these functions as well: radioButtons()
**UI and Server (call and response)** 
	- `downloadButton()` and `downloadHandler()` to add a button for the user to download the result table as a csv file.

4. Here are some things I learned that my app won't tell you:
	- The flow between the UI and Server files
	- That it's a good idea to annotate your code extensively, because when reading it back, if it doesn't make sense to me, it will be impossible to read for somebody else :no_mouth:
	- Indentation is so important !! But sometimes, I found that the default indentation is visually confusing and difficult to read (especially when trying to find a missing parenthesis), but it's better to stick to the default so that it's consistent.
	- It is better to do "computationally expensive" data manipulation steps separately, especially if the data used will only changed periodically and rarely.

Thank you for your time,
My Linh Thibodeau

***

# TUTORIAL - Genomic Disorders Exploration (GDE)

## Welcome to the tutorial for my Genomic Disorders Exploration Shiny App

Since the field of genetics/genomics is quite specialized, I realized it might pose difficulties for people to review my Shiny App without any guidance. Therefore, I decided to write a short tutorial to easy the process. Please note that this information can also be found in the GDE App itself (tab 5 - Tutorial).


## Why this app?

I initially intended to make a Shiny App quiz on genomic disorders as a learning tool. A dear friend and colleague of mine will be passing her Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons Canada Medical Genetics and Genomics Specialty exam this year and I wanted to offer her this app as a gift. That being said, in the timeframe allowed for this assignment, I was only able to reach the level of an "exploration tool", so I will continue to work on this app even after this assignement ;)

## What kind of genomic data does it use?

The app uses data from different resources (see at the end of this document for exact references):

1. DECIPHER: A database of chromosomal imbalances (deletion/duplication) associated with abnormal phenotype.
2. HGNC (HUGO Gene Nomemclature Committee): Provides a standardized language to refer to human genes and also links to other genetic/genomic databases.
3. Orphanet: A resource for phenotypic and clinical information on rare genetic disorders. 

The main dataset used in this app is from the aggregation of the 3 above mentioned datasets. Since it is based on the **overlap** between these datasets, it mainly contains Mendelian genomic disorders caused by chromosomal deletions/duplications and it does **not** include the vast majority of disorders purely caused by other molecular mechanisms (e.g. triplet repeat expansion disorders, point mutations). However, since some disorders can be caused by different types of of molecular mechanisms (e.g. neurofibromatosis can be caused by point mutations or more rarely, by large deletions), some of these disorders may also be included in my app. 

## What does it do so far?

The app has 5 tabs:

* First tab: Phenotype and frequency - It is meant for the user to enter  a phenotype and select the frequency of this phenotype, and then the app results the following data:
	- A table with a list of syndromes (and associated characteristics if available, e.g. gene name)
	- A bar plot of the distribution of the mutation consequence types (syn. types of mutations) for this specific phenotype + frequency of phenotype combination
* Second tab: Checkout this box - It displays a tickbox, which when ticked, presents a drowdown menu of specific mutation consequence types. When the user select a choice, it will only diplay the genomic disorders corresponding to the 3 criteria: phenotype, frequency and specific mutation consequence.
* Third tab: Add organ selection - The user might have a large table when entering a common phenotype (e.g. intellectual disability + very frequent ~ 40 syndromes) and might want to refine his search further more by adding another organ system that is affected in this syndrome.
	- The user needs to select an organ and then click on the "CLICK HERE" button to make the table appear. The new table will only contain syndromes that fulfill all 3 criteria: phenotype + frequency + additional organ system involed. For example, selecting "Cancer predisposition" reduce the list of syndromes from ~40 to one: pearlman syndrome.
	- If no syndrome corresponds to the combination of the 3 criteria, the table will be empty.
* Fourth tab: Overview of source dataf - Contains general summary plots/figures of the aggregated data used for the app. 
* Fifth tab: Tutorial !
* Sixth tab:

## How to use it?

Here is a stepwise approach to use the app:

1. Enter a phenotype (see next section for ideas of phenotypes to enter) and consult the table of syndromes and mutation consequence frequency.
2. Move to the second tab and look at a subset of the table corresponding to the specific mutation consequence type.
3. Move to the third tab and select an additional organ involved in the syndrome. Click on the "CLICK HERE" button to see a table of syndromes fulfilling all 3 criteria.
4. Check out the fourth tab (overview of genomic data) to have an overview of the source data (aggregated data) and some sample data to get a general idea of the format of genomic data used in the app. 
5. The fifth tab contains the tutorial information.

## Here are "premade" scenarios for you to test my app

### Scenario 1 - Intellectual disability

I described this scenario above, but let's break it down for ease:

1. Enter the phenotype "seizures" and leave the frequency of feature at the default feature "Very frequent (99-80%)"
2. Navigate to second tab (Check out this checkbox) and select the "activating" mutation type to see a subset of interesting disorders.
3. Navigate to third tab (Add organ selection) and select "Cancer predisposition"
4. Press the "CLICK HERE" button and see the resulting table.f As you can see you only have one hit now: pearlman syndrome.

### Scenario 2 - Cleft palate

1. Enter the phenotype "cleft palate", but this time change the frequency to "Occasional (29-5%)" and browse the resulting table and plot.
2. Navigate to second tab (Check out this checkbox) and select the "all missense/in frame" mutation type to see interesting disorders.
3. Navigate to third tab (Add organ selection) and select "Bone marrow failure"
4. Press the "CLICK HERE" button and see the resulting table containing seven entities, many of which share a lot of phenotypic similarities. 
	- This information is not in the table, I am providing it for your interest: The syndromes listed are part of the chromosomal breakage disorders group and they are complex disorders associated with multiple malformations and hematological involvement (not only bone marrow failure, but also hematological malignancies).

### Scenario 3 - Skeletal dysplasia

1. Enter the phenotype "skeletal dysplasia", but this time select the frequency to "Frequent (79-30%)".
	- You will note that only one disorder, Neurofibromatosis type 1, frequently present skeletal dyplasia. 
	- The reason is that skeletal dysplasias are caused by high penetrance mutations. These disorders are often in the "all or nothing" category. It is extremely rare to see an individual with one/two pathogenic mutation(s) (depending on inheritance) and no phenotype at all. If you change the frequency to "Very frequent (99-80%)", you will see a longer list of disorders.
2. Change the frequency back to "Very frequent" and navigate to second tab (Check out this checkbox) and select the "dominant negative" mutation type to see a subset of skeletal dysplasias !

### Scenario 4 - Hearing impairment

1. Enter the phenotype "hearing impairment" and leave the frequency of feature at the default feature "Very frequent (99-80%)".
	- I have chosen this feature to illustrate that the full standardized Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) phenotype name has to be entered in order for the app to work. I have not figured yet how to do "contains the term" yet.
	- Therefore, entering "hearing" or "hearing loss" will not provide any results.
2. Navigate to third tab (Add organ selection) and select "Heart/Cardiovasculature/Lymphatic".
3. Press the "CLICK HERE" button and see the resulting table of some syndromes of interest.
 
### Don't forget to check out the overview tab

Arm yourself with patience, it takes quite a few seconds to output the plots and figures because of the size of the dataset (a few thousands)! Although it is still in progress, check out the overview tab to peak at the type of genomic data used in the app.
 
# Final note

I hope you will enjoy trying out my app !

I am still in the process of troubleshooting and I have issues with duplicates and overview plots. There are many things I would like to do (e.g. put the list of organs in two columns, make the App into a quiz-like app, etc.) so please don't hesitate to provide your tips and recommendations to improve this app, I could use some technical help here :D !

If you have any questions, please don't hesitate to let me know,

Warm regards,
My Linh Thibodeau


***
### Other references

* Code chunks in part from the Shiny RStudio website [here](http://shiny.rstudio.com/articles/app-formats.html)
* R and XML package "how to use" [here](https://www.r-bloggers.com/r-and-the-web-for-beginners-part-ii-xml-in-r/) and [here](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/19747488/parsing-xml-in-r)